JUDY WOODRUFF: Hundreds missing
after a cruise ship capsizes on
the Yangtze River
in China -- the race against
time to rescue survivors.
Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Also ahead this Tuesday: He's
out. The embattled president of
FIFA resigns days after
his reelection failed to
lift a cloud of controversy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then: righting a
wrong. Once-overlooked soldiers
receive the Medal of Honor
nearly
100 years after fighting on the
front lines of World War I.
GWEN IFILL: Plus, media for and
by those who are homeless, from
newspapers to the silver
screen, empowering people
who live on the streets.
BRIAN CAROME, Executive
Director, Street Sense: One of
the things is the powerful
transformational
effect that self-expression has
on our lives, because you have
got to first believe in yourself
to claw your way out of this
deep hole that is homelessness.
GWEN IFILL: Those are some of
the stories we're covering on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: A frantic rescue
effort continued all day in
China, for hundreds of people on
a river cruise out of Nanjing.
Their ship rolled over during
stormy weather last night,
and so far, only 15 people
have been found alive.
John Sparks of Independent
Television News has our report.
JOHN SPARKS: From the murky
depths of the Yangtze River, a
woman appears surrounded
by a team of
professional divers.
She's weak on her feet, but very
much alive, the woman, 65 years
old, one of a small number
of survivors from a cruise ship
called the Eastern Star, which
capsized in a storm overnight.
The divers found her near the
upturned bow sheltering in an
air pocket 15 meters below
the surface~
There remains, however, more
than 400 people unaccounted for,
the vast majority retirees
on a 13-day cruise, and
emergency personnel have
struggled. They heard voices
inside
the ship this morning, this man
responding by tapping his
hammer.
Later, they tried to cut a hole
through the ship's hull, but
poor weather and strong currents
have hampered their efforts.
Tonight, the head of the rescue
effort said his team were
in a race against time. "The
incident happened very
suddenly," said Yang Chuatan
(ph), "but
we will give it 100 percent."
The Chinese prime minister, Li
Keqiang, also on TV today, here
taking charge of the rescue
effort. It's a public
relations gesture in part from
Communist Party officials
worried how about the public and
the victims' families will
react.
For desperate relatives, there
was little information to be
had. In Nanjing, the travel
company said only that staff
had gone to the accident site.
MAN (through translator):
There's just the notice on the
door. We don't know if they're
alive.
JOHN SPARKS: And the
authorities, well, they have a
maritime catastrophe on their
hands. Still, details from the
scene will be tightly controlled
with journalists being
kept away from the site.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news, the Senate approved
legislation to reshape the
National Security Agency's
surveillance. The NSA's legal
authority to collect bulk phone
records under the Patriot Act
expired Sunday night. In its
place, the USA Freedom Act
will impose new limits on
collection and access to the
records. Senators passed it
67-32
after House leaders warned
against making any changes.
The House overwhelmingly
approved the measure last month.
That demand aggravated Senate
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: We were not
going to simply just roll over
and accept the House bill
without debating it and
attempting to amend it. We hear
various
members of the House saying,
don't change the bill at all.
You would think it was
the Ten Commandments. The
Senate is entitled to change the
bill.
GWEN IFILL: McConnell favored
extending the expired Patriot
Act, along with its expired
tougher surveillance provisions,
but Republican Rand Paul, a
presidential candidate, blocked
that last week. Today, Illinois
Senator Dick Durbin and other
Democrats said the GOP
mishandled the whole issue.
SEN. RICHARD DURBIN (D-IL),
Minority Whip: Senate
Republicans wasted precious time
as the clock ran out on key
national security authority,
putting their own political
interests
ahead of the national interests.
Well, enough is enough. We as
senators are not here to
serve as extras in a
presidential campaign
commercial.
GWEN IFILL: The bill now goes
to the president's desk. He
tweeted this evening that he
will
sign it as soon as it arrives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Paris today,
Western and Arab nations pledged
new support to help Iraq
fight a growing Islamic State
threat. Foreign ministers and
others convened at the French
Foreign Ministry.
The gathering was organized
after ISIS fighters captured
Ramadi in Iraq and Palmyra in
Syria.
Iraqi Prime Minister Haider
al-Abadi said ISIS fighters are
using enormous truck bombs
that explode like a mini-nuclear
bomb. He complained the
coalition's air campaign is
not enough and said he
needs far more help.
GWEN IFILL: Suspected Islamist
militants have struck again in
Nigeria. Witnesses
and medics report up to 50
people were killed in a series
of bombings today. It happened
in the northeastern city of
Maiduguri, where an explosion
ripped apart a crowded meat
market.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Greece submitted
a proposal to its creditors
today, hoping to unlock more
bailout funds. Details were not
made public, but Eurozone
leaders warned the two sides
are still a long way
from agreement.
Greek Prime Minister Alexis
Tsipras said it's up to those
leaders to decide what happens
now.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS, Greek Prime
Minister (through translator):
We have made concessions,
because
a compromise demands
concessions. We know these
concessions will be difficult,
but we
have submitted a realistic plan
for Greece to exit the crisis, a
realistic plan, whose
acceptance by the institutions,
our lenders and our partners in
Europe will mark the end
of the scenario of
divisions in Europe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Without new
rescue funds, Greece may default
on its debts at the end
of this month.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, police in Boston today
shot and killed a man under
surveillance in a terror
investigation. CNN and others
reported he'd become an Islamist
radical and recently posted
online threats against police.
Boston's commissioner says
when officers and federal agents
moved in, the man pulled a large
knife and came at them,
so they opened fire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amtrak's boss
vowed today to get new
technology up and running, so it
can stop speeding passenger
trains. The train that wrecked
in Philadelphia last month
wasn't using positive train
control, or PTC. It hit a curve
doing more than 100 miles
an hour, and derailed,
killing eight people.
At a House hearing today, an
emotional Joseph Boardman said
he's focused on the Northeast
Corridor.
JOSEPH BOARDMAN, CEO, Amtrak: I
still believe that the single
greatest contribution that
my generation of railroaders can
make to this industry is to
implement PTC as rapidly as
possible. And I promise you
that, by the end of this year,
this system, which will
dramatically enhance safety,
will be complete and operational
on the NEC.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The National
Transportation Safety Board is
still investigating the May
12 accident.
GWEN IFILL: The acting head of
the Transportation Security
Administration has been
reassigned
over security failures. Melvin
Carraway was ousted in the wake
of tests overseen by
the agency's inspector general.
Government audits reported
undercover agents smuggled
fake explosives, weapons and
other banned items past TSA
screeners in 67 out of 70
attempts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The California
State Senate voted today to
allow immigrants here illegally
to buy insurance on a state
health exchange. California
would be the first to take that
step, under the Affordable Care
Act, if the state assembly and
the governor go along.
The immigrants wouldn't be
eligible for insurance
subsidies.
GWEN IFILL: And on Wall Street,
the Dow Jones industrial average
lost 28 points to
close back near 18010. The
Nasdaq fell six points, and the
S&P 500 slipped two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the most powerful man in sports
steps down amid corruption
investigations; lawmakers want
answers on car safety after
massive recalls of defective
air bags; honoring the valor and
service of overlooked World War
I veterans; an FBI secret
air force, the low-flying planes
on missions for domestic
surveillance; documenting the
stories of homeless people on
newsprint, film and in song;
plus, educating Pakistani
children
in failing schools surrounded
by violence and instability.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just four days
after he won reelection to a
fifth term as the head of
soccer's international governing
body, Sepp Blatter stunned
nearly everyone today when
he announced he would resign as
president of FIFA. Top FIFA
officials were arrested
last week.
The Department of Justice
uncorked a 47-count indictment
alleging bribery and widespread
corruption. And, yesterday,
published reports said Blatter's
top deputy had been linked
to wire transfers involving bank
payments believed to be bribes
related to World Cup
bids.
At a hastily called news
conference today, Blatter didn't
address the specifics, but
acknowledged the mounting
scandal undercut the votes and
the mandate he said he received
last week.
JOSEPH "SEPP" BLATTER,
President, FIFA (through
translator): This mandate
doesn't seem to
be supported by everybody in the
world of football, supporters,
clubs, players, those
who inspire life in football, as
much as we do at FIFA. That's
why I will call an extraordinary
congress and put at disposal my
function. It is going to be
held as soon as possible
and a new president will
be elected to follow me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's look at
the sudden resignation and the
circumstances around it.
Declan Hill is an investigative
journalist and the author of a
book about FIFA's problems
with corruption. It's called
"The Fix: Soccer and Organized
Crime." I spoke with him a
short time ago from Ottawa.
Declan Hill, welcome.
So, why the sudden reversal?
Sepp Blatter said just on Friday
that he was glad to be
reelected and this was going
to be a new era for FIFA.
DECLAN HILL, Investigative
Journalist: It really is
extraordinary.
I mean, today's events starting
early Zurich time dawn all the
way to right now is an epic,
shaking time in international
sports. It reminds me a little
bit of "Game of Thrones,"
the Lannisters are meeting
at King's Landing.
And what is really going on is a
bunch of kingmakers, people
behind the throne, people
that we don't see in public,
either as the journalists or as
sports fans, I think phoned
up Sepp Blatter this morning
and said enough is enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what
precipitated that? As you and I
are speaking, as we tape this
interview, ABC News is reporting
that the FBI, U.S. prosecutors
are now investigating
Blatter himself.
DECLAN HILL: Yes, and you have
an extraordinary scenario here.
As you can see, I'm speaking to
you from Ottawa, Canada, where
the women's World Cup will be
in a few days. The second in
command today earlier today in
Zurich suddenly discovered
that he had crucial business
that meant he couldn't fly to
Canada. Really, what may
be going on, and a lot of people
are talking about this, is that
he's afraid of landing
in Canada.
Canadian extradition laws with
the United States are excellent,
and if you guys want
people arrested, our police
services generally arrest them
and extradite them right way,
unlike Switzerland or
Trinidad and Tobago.
So, there was a fear that the
top executives couldn't even
attend the women's World Cup
without fear of being arrested.
This is really extraordinary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there a
sense, Declan Hill, of who else
may be implicated before
this is over?
DECLAN HILL: Yes, I looked at
the FBI indictment that came
out, as you know, under Loretta
Lynch, the attorney general,
last week, and it's an
extraordinary picture.
What they really paint is a
deliberate, clear, informal
organized crime syndicate
operating
inside international sports. So
you have the public face of how
to market these TV,
all these ticketing things, and
then you have these really
meticulous, well-planned scams
that are going on inside that
organization. So, really, if
you're getting the second
in command who is afraid of
getting on a plane to fly to
Canada, it really could be
anyone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, for Blatter
to step down and be replaced by
someone else, how much
of a change is that
in and of itself?
DECLAN HILL: I think it's
really an era-making change.
There's a whole bunch of
national sports federations
around the world or soccer
federations that
are going to be deeply, deeply
worried. Look, FIFA has a track
record of, when national
governments, be they Iran, be
they Greece, be they Kenya, be
they Nigeria, look at their
soccer and say, hang on, if this
is too corrupt, we're going to
clean it up.
FIFA will go in and stop those
government investigations. They
will stop those police
investigations and they will
say, hey, you know, you can't
investigate our people, because
that's politics
interfering with sport.
So you have sports, soccer
federations around the world
that have been essentially
protected
by Blatter and the people in
Zurich. That day seems to be
over now, and that's going
to shake the soccer world
in a tremendous way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Declan Hill, we
thank you very much for talking
with us.
DECLAN HILL: Thanks for having
me on, Judy. Very much
appreciate it.
GWEN IFILL: Millions of car
owners face a dilemma. There's
a nationwide recall for
defective air bags affecting
vehicles made by most of the
major auto manufacturers. But
a bigger recall may also mean
a longer wait for repair.
That was just one of several
issues lawmakers laid at the
doorstep today of the Takata
Corporation,
the air bag manufacturer. It's
now the largest auto safety
recall in U.S. history, nearly
34 million vehicles. And,
today, Takata was called before
Congress again.
Executive vice president
Kevin Kennedy:
KEVIN KENNEDY, Executive Vice
President, Takata: It is
unacceptable to us for even one
of
our products to fail to
perform as intended.
GWEN IFILL: Over time, chemical
inflators in Takata air bags
have exploded with so much
force that they spray metal
fragments. The problem is
linked to six deaths and more
than
100 injuries worldwide
since 2003.
KEVIN KENNEDY: We deeply regret
each instance in which someone
has been injured or killed.
We're committed to doing
everything in our power to
address the safety concerns
raised
by air bag ruptures.
GWEN IFILL: Kennedy said Takata
now plans to change the design
of its driver-side air
bags. But lawmakers worried
about how long it will take.
Republican Congressman Fred
Upton pressed Mark Rosekind,
head of the National Highway
Traffic and Safety
Administration.
REP. FRED UPTON (R), Michigan:
What is the goal, the timetable
for completely resolving
the issue, being able to
identify which vehicles have
these defective air bags,
getting them
replaced, making sure the owners
are there? What's your hopeful
time frame for this
to be resolved and we can
move to the next issue?
MARK ROSEKIND, Administrator,
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration: At this point,
I believe if anybody gave you a
number, they don't know what
they're talking about.
GWEN IFILL: Rosekind warned his
agency is underfunded and
already has more than 1,200
other recall campaigns
to oversee.
Let's get more about the
questions asked at this hearing
and the problems consumers are
running into with this recall.
David Shepardson of The Detroit
News covers the auto industry.
And he was covering this
hearing today.
David, do we know anything more
about the cause of these defects
in the air bags, whether
it's chemical or
design or whatever?
DAVID SHEPARDSON, The Detroit
News: I think the answer is all
of the above. In fact,
Takata and NHTSA and an
independent testing group by the
major auto companies think
there's
a variety of factors, number
one, the propellant, ammonium
nitrate, and the fact that,
under
high-humidity circumstances, it
appears to be more likely to
explode or exit at a higher
heat than other propellants, as
well as the design of these air
bags.
In fact, as you pointed out,
Takata is ending its use of one
of these major driver-side
air bags. And then issues like
the tape used to actually attach
the inflator to the
air bag. So you have got a lot
of different causes, and the
fact that you have got 53
million vehicles worldwide, six
deaths and 100 injuries, but
trying to figure out that
needle in a haystack, why are
just such a few number failing,
but when they do fail,
it can be with
deadly consequences?
GWEN IFILL: Catastrophic.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Right.
GWEN IFILL: So, that's a big
number, 53 million worldwide.
How many models are we
talking about in the U.S.?
Because, in the past, when
recalls have happened, it's been
the actual manufacturer of the
vehicle who did the recall. Is
that what's happening
now? Everyone is scrambling?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: You have got
11 major auto companies
recalling 34 million vehicles
in the U.S.; 17 million have
previously been recalled, so
it's about double that.
And the answer is, we don't know
yet, because, to date, only
seven of the eleven companies
have notified the government as
to the identities of the new
vehicles that are being added to
the recall, and within that you
have got dozens and dozens of
models. So to get to the -- you
know, the end point, where we
know all the vehicles are
probably, as the administrator
was saying, going to take weeks,
if not months, and then you have
got the issue of just building
all the parts.
GWEN IFILL: Well, OK. So,
assume that you were driving one
of these cars which are
suspect, with the suspect air
bag, and you go to the
government Web site, and you
compare
your VIN number, you do all
these things right to find out
that indeed yours is a car which
is under recall. So then how
long will it take you to get
that fix made?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: The answer
really depends likely on where
you are, because the auto
companies and Takata are
prioritizing the high-humidity
areas.
Because right now they have only
built four million replacement
kits, they have got 30
million more to build, and
they're only going to get up to
one million units built per
month
by September, it could
ultimately take two years to
build the parts.
So, if you're in a high-humidity
area, chances are you can get
the fix done immediately.
But check with your dealer.
Depending on the stock of your
dealer, you may be able
to get your vehicle fixed
immediately, and some companies
are offering loaner vehicles
as well. So, there's no good
answer. And, remember, it could
take up to 60 days for
all of the VIN numbers
to get inputted.
So, if you don't see your
vehicle recalled, as the
administrator said, keep
checking once
a week for a couple of
months potentially.
GWEN IFILL: Because of the size
of this recall, is this
something that needs to be
taken out of the hands of -- at
least it has come up in the
hearing today -- of the
individual
auto companies and be handled by
the government instead, by
NHTSA?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: It's a rare
example where the auto companies
actually agree that NHTSA
should take over, as do both the
Republicans and Democrats on the
committee, because you
have got a lot of
decisions to make.
Who gets the parts first? What
if one company's air bags are
more dangerous than the others?
So, the auto companies want
NHTSA to take over and decide
some of these very sticky
decisions and act as an advocate
for the U.S. because you have
got those 20 million vehicles
abroad. And the U.S. could be
jockeying with the other
countries to see who gets those
replacement parts first.
GWEN IFILL: But NHTSA says
they're underfunded. How would
they handle something this big?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Well, they're
handling so many different big
issues right now. They're
in a big fight with Fiat
Chrysler over recalls and
they're still overseeing GM, and
their
budget is down 23 percent for
defects in real dollars over a
decade.
The White House wants more money
for them to triple their defects
budget and double
their staff, but so far Congress
has not really moved on it. But
the top Republican on the
committee today said if NHTSA
made a better request, they'd
reconsider. But it's still
going to be an uphill battle to
convince Congress to give them
more money or more authority.
GWEN IFILL: Sounds like the
whole thing is an uphill battle
for now.
David Shepardson of The
Detroit News, thank you.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Thanks, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nearly a full
century after they fought in
World War I, a pair of veterans
were honored posthumously by the
president today. He gave them
the nation's highest
military award, the Medal of
Honor, saying their heroism had
never been fully recognized
because of discrimination.
One recipient was
African-American. The other was
Jewish.
William Brangham has the story.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: They both risked
their own lives to save
the lives of others. They both
left us decades ago, before we
could give them the full
recognition
that they deserved, but it's
never too late to say thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For one of
the men honored by President
Obama today, recognition for
his acts of valor were a long
time coming. In 1917, Henry
Johnson joined the all-black
369th Regiment, known as
the Harlem Hellfighters.
At the time, most black soldiers
just performed menial labor, not
combat operations. But
the Hellfighters were deployed
to France and fought under
French command. Private Johnson
was stationed in France on the
western front. On sentry duty
one night, he and another
private, named Needham Roberts,
came under fire from at least a
dozen German soldiers.
After a long fight, both men
were wounded, Roberts was
unconscious, and the Germans
advanced.
BARACK OBAMA: Then he grabbed
the only weapon he had left --
his Bolo knife -- and went
to rescue Needham. Henry took
down one enemy soldier, then the
other. And finally,
reinforcements
arrived and the last
enemy soldier fled.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For his
extraordinary acts, Johnson was
given France's highest military
honor, the Croix de Guerre.
Johnson and the Hellfighters
were welcomed home by adoring
crowds in Harlem and across
New York. His image was even
used on recruitment posters.
And in a private letter, General
John Pershing, the top American
commander during the war,
recognized Johnson.
But neither Johnson's bravery
nor the 21 wounds he sustained
that night were noted in his
military records back home.
Yohuru Williams, a history
professor at Fairfield
University in Connecticut, said
that was no
simple oversight.
YOHURU WILLIAMS, History
Professor, Fairfield University:
When the French began to
recognize
and celebrate acts of valor,
like we see with the Henry
Johnson case, Pershing's
reaction
wasn't to celebrate these
troops, but actually try to
introduce Jim Crow segregation
into
the French government and into
the army, into the war itself.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But after
decades of advocacy by fellow
veterans and others, Johnson was
posthumously awarded the Purple
Heart by President Clinton in
1996, and the Medal of Honor
today
by President Obama.
Another World War I veteran
received the nation's highest
military honor today, Sergeant
William
Shemin. While Shemin did
receive the military's second
highest award in 1919, the
president
said his accomplishments never
got the full honor they
deserved, in part because he was
Jewish. Shemin's daughters were
on hand to accept his award
today.
BARACK OBAMA: The Allies were
hunkered down in one trench, the
Germans in another, separated
by about 150 yards of open space
-- just a
football-field-and-a-half.
But that open space was a
bloodbath. Soldier after
soldier ventured out, and
soldier after
soldier was mowed down. So
those still in the trenches were
left with a terrible choice,
die trying to rescue your fellow
soldier, or watch him die,
knowing that part of you
will die along with him.
William Shemin couldn't stand to
watch. He ran out into the hell
of No Man's Land and
dragged a wounded comrade to
safety. And then he did it
again, and again. Three times,
he raced through heavy machine
gunfire. Three times, he
carried his fellow soldiers to
safety.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At a press
conference earlier this week,
Elsie Shemin-Roth said
her father was one of
many overlooked heroes.
ELSIE SHEMIN-ROTH, Daughter of
Sergeant William Shemin: This
supreme honor is the name of
William Shemin, but it would
please him if it were also
dedicated to the fallen, the
survivors and their families who
didn't have the proper paperwork
or representation depicting
their valor.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Professor
Williams says recognizing
soldiers like Shemin and Johnson
today reminds us that the
failure to acknowledge the
contributions of minority
soldiers is
an ugly, but undeniable
theme of American history.
YOHURU WILLIAMS: Ultimately,
what happens is, you go from
this moment where Johnson
is celebrated by his own
community, and yet has to deal
with the reality that the United
States government, those that
hold power, those in power are
not doing anything to meet
not only his needs, but the
needs of other soldiers who
fought bravely for their
country.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Because of
his wounds, Henry Johnson could
not work after returning
from the war. And because those
wounds went undocumented, he was
ineligible for military
benefits. He died in 1929,
penniless and ravaged by
alcoholism. The president said
today's ceremony was a small way
to right the wrongs done to
Johnson and his fellow
service members.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham in Washington.
GWEN IFILL: Even if Congress
reined in government
surveillance powers today,
evidence of a different
sort of privacy concerns
surfaced, this time at the FBI.
The Associated Press reported
that the FBI operates a fleet of
undercover planes shielded
by fake company names that flew
surveillance over at least 30
cities in 11 states during
a 30-day period. They're
equipped with video cameras and
sometimes equipment to gather
cell phone area.
The FBI says the flights target
suspected criminals and that, in
most cases, a warrant
is not necessary.
Jack Gillum is one of the
reporters at the Associated
Press on the story.
Describe the secret fleet
that you guys wrote about.
JACK GILLUM, Associated
Press: Well, most
often, if you were going to look
up a tail number -- that is the
number that is emblazoned
on the back of the plane -- you
might go to the FAA's database
of that aircraft. Sometimes,
it might say it belongs to Jack
Gillum or a corporation, maybe
Google, Microsoft, a
corporate jet of sorts, but all
of these aircraft belong to
these sort of strange-looking
companies,
M.G. Research being one of them,
a mix of letters, sometimes the
word research, sometimes
other names, that all trace
back to a bunch of P.O. Boxes.
Now, this came to light after
this aircraft was spotted and
reported by The Washington
Post in early May during some
civil unrest following the death
of Freddie Gray in Baltimore.
Now, what we found is we wanted
to look and see, are there are
more aircraft like
this, and started digging
through FAA records and other
air flight radar patterns to see
just the full scope
of this operation.
GWEN IFILL: So, let's go back
to this idea of dummy
corporations. What's the point
of shielding the owners
of these planes?
JACK GILLUM: The FBI says that
when they want to do this sort
of fictitious company,
it's that they don't want to
give criminals on the ground a
heads-up that when they look
at the sky above they're going
to see a plane that belongs to
the FBI or to the U.S.
government.
They also say that they want to
keep operational security. So
if you have -- if know that
it's an FBI plane, you know
where it takes off and lands,
you might be able to sabotage
it. Now, that doesn't really
sit well in the minds of a lot
of people for whom these
planes are circling above
overhead, and sometimes they get
very concerned, even calling
911,
asking who is this guy above
my house and what is he doing?
GWEN IFILL: What does the FBI
say when they get these
questions? What are -- or what
do they say to you that
they're looking for?
JACK GILLUM: Well, leading up
into this report, until we spoke
to some law enforcement
officials, is that they had
largely told in either reports,
either in local news reports
or when people had asked,
they largely remained silent.
The Federal Aviation
Administration, which of course
registers the planes, had also
largely
remained silent. In this case,
U.S. government officials said
that, no, we're behind these,
we set up these dummy
corporations to keep secrecy, or
at least to not let people know
what these planes are, but
indeed that the program is also
not secret.
GWEN IFILL: So this was one of
those issues that was kind of
hiding in plain sight. People
saw these planes, they knew
something was up, but the
government never confirmed it
until now?
JACK GILLUM: That's right.
And it was the volume of the
flights that stood out to us.
So we were able to look
at lot of flight radar data
going -- following these flights
from Seattle to Houston, Dallas
to the Boston area. We were
able to stitch the flights
together initially by not just
looking at these registrations
back to these dummy companies in
rural Virginia, but also
the aircraft registration
records, which had what appeared
to be fictitious CEOs, one man
signing his name at least three
different ways across several of
these companies that
were set up.
GWEN IFILL: I think the name
was Robert Lindley. And, as far
as you know, he doesn't
exist.
JACK GILLUM: Yes, right. And
the FBI and the government
generally says it would not
confirm if he's an employee.
GWEN IFILL: Now, this doesn't
require a court, a judge. We
were talking about the
Patriot Act. That required a
secret court to sign off on some
of the surveillance. This
doesn't?
JACK GILLUM: Law enforcement
officials will say that when
you're viewing somebody from
the sky, there's no Fourth
Amendment protection here.
The question really becomes, as
technology evolves, is just how
specific can a technology
be? Ten years ago, 15 years
ago, a pair of binoculars might
have been all that does
the trick. Now you have H.D.
video. You can zoom in very
closely. And the concern
for civil libertarians and
privacy advocates is if you're
up there and you're recording
this video and it gets more
granular over time, what's going
to be used with that video,
how it's going to be stored,
and can you rewind your life?
GWEN IFILL: And it's not just
video. There is actual
equipment attached to some of
these
planes that can track cell
phones in a way -- like from
cell phone tower to cell phone
tower?
JACK GILLUM: That's right.
And the FBI says that this
practice is extremely rare, a
rare occurrence. But this
technology,
which has been used in some
criminal cases, tricks cell
phones below into thinking that
it's a cell tower and coughs up
some basic subscriber data,
effectively allowing police,
in this case the FBI, to
know who's down below.
GWEN IFILL: If you're
barbecuing in your backyard, and
you have your cell phone in
your pocket, it's possible that
there's a plane that flies above
your backyard who knows
who you are and
what you're doing?
JACK GILLUM: If they are
capturing that cell phone
surveillance and they are able
to tie that serial number to
your cell phone to your name,
they could probably do that.
GWEN IFILL: Or theoretically a
terrorist could be caught the
same way.
JACK GILLUM: At a
barbecue possibly, too.
GWEN IFILL: Possibly.
Jack Gillum of the
Associated Press, thank you.
JACK GILLUM: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As homelessness
has grown in cities across the
country, more so-called
street papers have cropped
up to help tell the story.
We went back to look again at
how one newspaper in the
nation's capital is doing 10
years
later.
The "NewsHour"'s Anne Davenport
found it is expanding its
mission.
WOMAN: It's my honor and
privilege to welcome you this
evening to Cinema From the
Streets,
a cooperation of amazing talent
by our colleagues, both housed
and unhoused.
ANNE DAVENPORT: When you think
of red carpet film premieres,
this is not the customary
scene. Among this group are
developing filmmakers who appear
in their own documentary about
homelessness. They are or have
been homeless in the nation's
capital and are now seeing
their work on the big screen.
Three short films were recently
produced by Capturing Hope, part
of an organization called
Street Sense. The team members
are eager to get out their story
and learn valuable
production skills. Street Sense
also publishes the only
newspaper by and for the
homeless
in Washington, enabling sellers
to make $1.50 for every $2 paper
sold. The twice-monthly
newspaper also trains
participants in journalism and a
variety of forms of writing,
with 12,000
issues sold each addition.
Now, in a novel approach, the
Street Sense organization is
expanding more heavily into
arts education and digital media
in order to help homeless people
get a toehold in diverse
creative careers. Workshops and
apprenticeships are led by
volunteer professionals.
In addition to the filmmaking,
there's theater, interactive
art, digital photography, where
one participant shared a
first-person piece documenting
his heart condition.
BRIAN CAROME, Executive
Director, Street Sense:
Our vision is that we're a
full-spectrum media company,
that we're spreading the word
about homelessness.
ANNE DAVENPORT: Brian Carome
leads Street Sense. This is the
paper's 11th year and
it is housed here at the
Episcopal Church of the Epiphany
in downtown Washington. Fifty
percent of its support comes
from individual contributions,
25 percent from newspaper sales,
and 15 percent from
foundations and corporations.
BRIAN CAROME: We have
two missions here.
One is economic opportunities
for men and women who are
homeless. You can walk in
the doors today and be out
working today, even if you don't
have a penny in your pocket,
even if you just got to of jail,
even if you slept outside last
night, even if you're still
struggling with serious
disabilities. And we're proud
of that work.
And then our second half of our
mission is public education.
We're -- the content of
our media is meant to impact
hearts and minds in this
community. And the new media
that
we're doing, the media beyond
the print, beyond the newspaper,
is also, we believe, creating
avenues for much higher-paying
employment than you can
experience selling a newspaper
on a street corner.
ANNE DAVENPORT: Sasha Williams,
who was raped at gunpoint
earlier in life, has been
homeless off and on for a number
years. She has just landed
stable housing, enabling her
to move out of a shelter with
her 2-year-old daughter, Eboni
(ph). She is now documenting
the conditions there
for a future film.
Sasha is the main videographer
for the Cinema From the Streets
films that debuted. She
wants to pursue a
career in this craft.
SASHA WILLIAMS, Street Sense
Participant: I still have to
redo my resume, which I
like to do, because it shows the
stuff that I have been doing
with myself, which is a
good look for me to think
about the positive stuff.
And it's really helping me to
build up myself, being a good
mom, being a woman. They treat
me like I'm a genuine colleague.
They don't treat me like I'm
just a client.
ANNE DAVENPORT: James Davis is
training a new Street Sense
vendor on the do's and
don'ts of selling the paper on
the street and representing the
organization. Davis
would know. He had recently
joined Street Sense when the
"NewsHour" interviewed him
10 falls ago. He was a homeless
engineer, laid off from his
security clearance job and
in the midst of a divorce
and deepening depression.
JAMES DAVIS, Street Sense: It's
just more than a newspaper.
It's more giving back
in the sense of helping people.
ANNE DAVENPORT: Davis was also
contributing poetry to the
paper.
JAMES DAVIS: Hope turns to
despair while they gather at a
place called some, the men
with worn look of
life on their faces.
ANNE DAVENPORT: And today? In
addition to counseling new
vendors, he advocates on
behalf of the National Coalition
for the Homeless in forums and
works at Metro part time. He
lives independently, and still
writes and sells papers,
pocketing an average of $100
a day, with the possibility of a
few hundred dollars around the
holidays.
JAMES DAVIS: I have a customer
base that's already in place. I
believe we put out a
good product. And people really
look forward to reading the
paper. Maybe this was my
purpose to go through
homelessness, so I can know what
I'm talking about, so I can help
others.
ANNE DAVENPORT: Currently in
Washington, D.C., proper, there
are almost 7,300 homeless
people in the city and close to
12,000 in the D.C. metro area,
though many think that
count may be low. Recent
statistics show there are 41,000
households active on the
wait-list for D.C. housing.
More than 20,000 listed
themselves as homeless.
Nancy Burnett works with an
angel investor organization and
runs a financial educators
group.
NANCY BURNETT, Alliance of
Securities and Financial
Educators: If I was given a
choice
for the same price, let's say,
to have a videographer who has
got a lot of experience, a lot
of
awards, and I would take them at
the same time that I would take
this population of
learners. They have a different
eye, they have a different ear.
They have -- you know,
their soul is different.
BRIAN CAROME: One of the things
is the powerful transformational
effect that self-expression
has on our lives, because you
have got to first believe in
yourself to claw your way
out of this deep hole
that is homelessness.
ANNE DAVENPORT: So, as James
Davis and Sasha Williams and
others continue their efforts
for a more stable existence,
they help each other in this
collaborative workshop
environment.
In Washington, D.C., I'm Anne
Davenport for the "PBS
NewsHour."
(SINGING)
GWEN IFILL: That's
a nice voice.
Go online to see a link to the
recently-released films about
homelessness, and to hear from
a Street Sense filmmaker
and his mentor.
And we will be back with a look
at a new approach to schooling
in Pakistan.
But, first, it's pledge week on
PBS. This break allows your
public television station
to ask for your support. And
that support helps keep programs
like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to one
woman's efforts to find answers
in one of the world's most
distressed school systems.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro reports from Karachi,
Pakistan, part of his series
Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Eleven-year-old Aqsa (ph) has
high ambitions.
GIRL: First, I want to be a
public speaker, and then
president of Pakistan to change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
To change things?
How do you harness the energy
and the enthusiasm of young
children?
If you became president of
Pakistan, what would you like to
do?
GIRL: First, I will clean the
litter, because the biggest
problem is litter.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In Lyari,
one of Karachi's toughest
neighborhoods, Aqsa is part of
an
experiment started six years ago
called the Kiran (ph) School.
The children here are
encouraged to think big, to use
their imaginations. But the
gritty reality just outside of a
city often racked by terrorism
and violence looms large.
GIRL: There are many people who
are like, they are heartless, so
they kill people.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: What kind
of terrorism do you see in
Lyari?
GIRL: They killed one man at
night. It was late, 2:00. They
came and they killed
and went.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Eleven-year-old Hammad (ph) also
has witnessed killing first
hand.
He wants to be a robotics
scientist when he grows up.
BOY: Robots, like, do
everything. And they will stop
terrorism, not kill them, but
they will stop terrorism and
just give to the police.
SABINA KHATRI, Founder, Kiran
School: He said that, why can't
we have robots in Lyari
as policemen?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Sabina
Khatri is the school founder.
SABINA KHATRI: Nobody can kill
the robots. The bad people will
be defeated.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A mother of
grown children, Khatri lived in
Europe for many years before
returning to Karachi. She
started the Kiran School six
years ago, based on the
Montessori
learning model, admitting just
20 students each year, the goal,
prepare them to attend
top private English-language
schools, alongside children from
Karachi's tiny upper class.
She's raised scholarships and
donations in a foundation for
her social enterprise. The
children have thrived, Khatri
says, even become Harvard
material.
SABINA KHATRI: And this is one
of the principals who told me
that this kid can make it to
Harvard.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Problem is,
the vast majority of children in
Lyari and Pakistan
will go nowhere. Just 2 percent
of the government's budget goes
to education, and much of that
is squandered. Public schools
are in decrepit condition.
Fifty percent lack electricity;
40 percent have no toilets.
Many are stripped of furniture.
And it gets worse.
It's not uncommon in this
country for there to be public
schools that exist only on
paper.
The money's been allocated, but
no building's been built, no
students enrolled. The only
thing that is up and running is
the payroll for so-called
teachers. They are, in fact,
mostly beneficiaries
of political favors.
Khatri says the
government is starting to
face facts, and it's invited
outsiders to take over failing
schools. A few months
ago, Khatri adopted this Lyari
middle school. Her first task
was to hire new teachers
and tell most of the old ones,
tenured, so they could not be
fired, to just stay away.
SABINA KHATRI: They come and
make -- create troubles in the
school.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So, you
would just as soon have them
be...
SABINA KHATRI: Yes. I just
tell them that, if you're
creating trouble here, it's
better
that you don't come.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Her next
step, rearrange classes to
cluster students by ability, not
grade level.
SABINA KHATRI: Although they do
say that they are in the eighth
grade or ninth grade,
they can't even -- they don't
even know how to write their
name in Urdu, let alone in
English.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
students here have been put in
an intense remedial curriculum.
There's strong emphasis on
inquiry and critical thinking,
instead of the more common rote
learning. The school also
teaches Islamic values that
Khatri says are too often
neglected,
like tolerance. It's a
challenge in a conservative and
in many ways isolated society.
SABINA KHATRI: The biggest
criticism and concern was that
maybe we were very modern,
that they feel that we teach our
children music and dance and we
are making them broad-minded.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And she's
poised to take a controversial
step.
SABINA KHATRI: We have actually
taken permission for a
co-education school. So, we
want to
admit girls now, because we
already have 250 boys in school.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Regular
meetings with parents and the
community are also part of
the job. When one woman at a
recent open house worried the
school was teaching liberal
values, Khatri asked an
11-year-old from the Kiran
School to respond.
SABINA KHATRI: She actually
said that, you know, we believe
in God. The way we have
learned about God is, God is
love. But that is not the way
other children are taught.
It's always taught that God
will punish you. God loves you.
They were quiet.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
And accepting?
SABINA KHATRI: It was a
wonderful -- yes, I think so,
because, then, after that, the
same lady, she said, I
want an admission form.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: One parent
was assuaged, but Khatri says
intolerance remains a threat.
So, community service projects
are another way to win the
neighborhood over. But in
a country racked by instability,
there is no guarantee.
SABINA KHATRI: Anything can
happen to me any time,
especially in the situation I
am,
and especially the kind of
things that have been happening
in our country, because social
workers have been
targeted lately, in the past two
or three years. Anyone who's
trying to help out people,
they just kill them.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Still,
Khatri, who was recently joined
by a prominent business leader,
plans to persist with what she
calls a promising prototype to
fix a broken school system.
She and many others say it's
where intolerance and most of
Pakistan's social and economic
problems have their root.
I'm Fred de Sam Lazaro for the
"PBS NewsHour" in Karachi,
Pakistan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's reporting
is a partnership with the
Under-Told Stories Project at
Saint
Mary's University of Minnesota.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: Paleontologists in
Brazil have stumbled upon a bird
fossil
that is so well-preserved, its
long tail feathers may have even
retained some of their original
coloring. Considering it's
roughly 115 million years old,
that's quite a find. Read about
the discovery, and see an
artist's rendering of its
colorful plumage, on our home
page.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's a
long
time to keep the color.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tune in later
this week. Miles O'Brien kicks
off a series, Cracking
Ebola's Code. Miles travels to
Sierra Leone and trails local
and international doctors
searching for the origins of the
virus, testing possible
vaccines, as they try to end the
worst outbreak of the virus in
history, and prepare for the
next one. That starts Thursday
on the "PBS NewsHour."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
We will see you online and again
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.